With Neil Armstrong's first step on the moon, America's race with the Russians had come to an end.
At one point, the man...
...I am the commander.
Writing on the co-tails of the successful Apollo 11 and 12 moon missions,
America planned to launch its third manned mission to the lunar surface by April 1970.
Unforeseen problems occurred that created a life and death situation
where the spacecraft and crew were all but lost.
Hello, I'm Bill Moomey and I portrayed astronaut Will Robinson on TV,
trying to get home after being lost in space.
The success of NASA's space program was the combined result of hundreds of thousands of people working toward a single goal,
that of reaching the lunar surface.
It was the flight of Apollo 13 more than any other mission before or since that brought these components to public light.
This is the true story of the Apollo 13 mission,
as told by some of the unsung heroes who were there,
and able to cheat death, avoid disaster, bring the astronauts back home safely,
and keep the crew from being lost in space.
The astronauts for Apollo 13 were chosen a year before launch,
commanded by the world's most experienced astronaut, James A. Lovell Jr.
He had already spent nearly 600 hours in space as a crew member on two Gemini flights
and Apollo 8, the first round trip to the moon.
The other two astronauts accompanying Lovell were both rookies.
The lunar module pilot was Fred Hayes,
and the command module pilot was Thomas Ken Mattingley.
A backup crew trains on the same equipment for the same mission in the event the prime crew cannot go.
The commander of the backup crew was John Young,
with Charles Duke as the lunar module pilot and Jack Swigger as the command module pilot.
Few people realize how many hundreds of hours these astronauts and flight controllers
spent in training and simulating mission activities.
Every action and movement during their mission were carefully planned and well thought out,
which were the real secrets to the successes of the Apollo program.
The simulations that we ran were very half-adelicators.
It was very much like a real flight.
Sitting in the control center, we couldn't tell the difference between whether it was a simulation or a real flight.
It licked exactly the same.
And the simulation people could throw faults into the system and we'd test this to see if we handle them correctly.
Thousands of problems and failures had been considered, documented,
and simulated throughout the history of the space program.
These training sessions formed the basis of the rules each mission followed.
Mission rules were all written to give you time to deal with issues that you didn't realize was going to happen.
And not very many times that anything happened that we didn't have a pre-planned operation for.
Sometimes they were disparate or sometimes not directly associated with each other as they had happened in a simulation.
But the flight controllers at that point in time in Apollo were very well trained.
I believe to handle most of anything that could happen.
We tried to cover it best, but we thought we're all the thousands of credible failures that could happen.
Both the spacecraft and the mission.
There were some always some people offline, including myself, but some key people that worked for me,
that would sit around and not and dream of worst case contingencies and what ifs,
and draw out solutions on the back of an African kind of an arrangement that weren't subjected to formal training.
So there was always a lot of what if this really does happen.
The crewmen tried to play it out as close as possible to what was really happening.
That is they played it like it was real.
Even the far out cases where it was almost too difficult to survive.
They played them all the way through.
And that didn't mean we didn't crash on the moon sometimes.
It was not our intention to practice for disaster.
I mean you don't need to do that.
But we would give them situations.
And in any of these situations you might do the wrong thing the first time.
You know, and then you go back and think about what you would do and then change your response and get better at it.
The simulation people were hit us with a failure and we'd handle it.
They'd hit us with another one.
And they would just finally they'd load us up so heavy that they knew they could finally break it.
See if they just kept breaking it.
And so we had some good nature ribbing quite often.
The point is where we would say look, get realistic.
You know, you get all those wages.
And the process of training we crashed many times into the moon.
Other times we did very nervous about what was happening with the guidance system.
And we'd abort unnecessarily to the point where we really started losing confidence in our own ability is controllers.
Our ability is a team.
The simulation team has to be able to defend their selection of a failure.
That's not the only thing they have to answer for.
They can be merciless in their scripting.
They do it real time. They take great delight.
And they're really good.
They are just a superb.
And as a result, we all learned a great deal about how to deal with the systems and how they worked and made our rules better because we try things that worked and didn't.
Level, haze, and maddeningly spent every minute of every day for over a year in simulators and training for this specific mission.
They were ready and prepared to meet their destiny in space.
Their spacecraft was by far the most complex piece of machinery ever sent into space.
The Saturn V rocket booster had three stages and was over 40 stories high.
Sitting on top of this rocket were the command, service, and lunar modules.
The command module capsule shown here in deep blue and named Odyssey was where the crew were to stay for their journey.
The service module, shown here in silver and red, was where the propulsion system and compressed air were located.
The lunar module that was to take level and haze to the moon's surface, named Aquarius, would be held inside the top of the third stage rocket booster until after launch.
Each and every one of the six million parts making up the spacecraft had to be tested and retested, but the Apollo 13 spacecraft would be ready to fulfill its task on schedule.
I had been on that flight. I had started worrying early on. I mean, like it was Apollo 13.
There had never been a 13 on the Gen. either the Mercury Gemini program.
I mean, it was going to be the first spacecraft that was called 13.
And I can tell you in the Army, in the military, I mean, like there's a superstition about numbers in 13.
And Maryland level says that she was superstitious about it.
You know, I mean, she didn't like the idea of it being called 13, but Gem level, of course, had no problem with it.
I mean, like, did he want to go? You know, I mean, he could have cared less what you called it.
Just a month before launch, the Apollo 13 jinx appeared for the first time during a test of the spacecraft's two liquid oxygen tanks that supplied the water, electricity, and breathable oxygen for the spacecraft.
The tanks were supposed to be filled and emptied as a routine check for leaks in the tanks or lines.
We'd have a tanking test on the spacecraft on the ground.
And when they went to detank, they were unable to get one of the oxygen tanks to dump its load.
And they decided to use the heaters and the tanks to boil the oxygen all.
And we'd had some fairly lengthy discussions with the engineers about it.
I was convinced that our engineering team had a good story. They understood what they were doing.
And procedures would sound, and I told Gem, he didn't need to worry about it.
Unknown to the engineers or crew, an electrical current overload in one of the oxygen tanks, shorted out the heater switch and fused the circuit breaker shut.
This malfunction was not identified and turned the tank into a bomb.
Only a week before launch, the Apollo 13 jinx appeared again and threw the entire mission into a turmoil.
The problem initially was I was so disappointed that I'd call all of that. I had the measles, you know, a week before the lift off and exposed the whole crew to it and Ken hadn't had the measles.
And so it was a big mess just because I had the three day measles.
Sending mattingly to the moon with the possibility he might come down with the measles was simply unthinkable for NASA.
There are only choices which either scrub the mission entirely and equally unthinkable prospect or to replace mattingly with his backup counterpart Jack Swigard.
Mixing and matching crews after several months of training together was never done before, but was the only option left open to NASA.
So only two days before the flight, mattingly was removed and replaced by Swigard.
This was the only time in the history of the space program that one prime crew member was replaced with a backup after they had begun their training.
Having concentrated seven days a week, 24 hours a day on an event that suddenly denied for what you feel is unreasonable.
Reason even though intellectually you know that it can sound decision emotionally, you feel like you've been cheated from something important.
And I don't think, from my viewpoint at least, that taking TK out of that seed and putting in Swigard was a big impact.
We didn't notice that much different. The backup crews have trained very much like the prime crews not as much, but obviously they were ready to go.
It was a testimony to our training that they could change out a person in that crew two days before launch and still the crew could function.
The Apollo 11 and 12 moon missions were so successful that the Apollo missions began to take on a routine nature, creating a sense of complacency in the public and media.
When launch day came for Apollo 13 on April 11, 1970, the launch itself was met with distinct public apathy and media indifference.
I think something like seven million people showed up to watch the Apollo 11 blast off. Apollo 12 a few months later, I think there were two million people showed up stood on the beach, watched the blast off.
By the time we got to Apollo 13, there were about 200,000. And the network didn't even cover the telecast.
At exactly 1313 military time in Houston, the Apollo 13 mission began with the Saturn V rocket lifting the spacecraft toward orbit.
On the way up on the booster, we happened to lose the center engine on the second stage about two minutes early to shut down to the high vibration.
And for that moment, we thought that this was the crisis of this particular flight because most space flights with the session perhaps at eight usually had something to go wrong with.
But we had enough fuel, we had enough power and enough engine power to get us into Earth orbit and then push it down to the moon.
Once the spacecraft left Earth's orbit, the command and service modules separated from the third stage rocket booster and turned around to dock up with the lunar module.
After docking was completed, springs ejected the lunar command and service modules from the Saturn rocket and the crew flew to the moon in this arrangement.
The Apollo 13, as in all flights that I've ever had anything to do with you always seem to have some malfunctions that take place.
And in Apollo 13, there were several, but I don't think they were Earth shaking or unexpected from the standpoint of problems.
Let's say, particularly on Apollo 13, most things were pretty routine and had gone reasonably well and we were looking forward to the third landing on the moon.
On April 13th, at 54 hours into the flight, level and haze were instructed to check out the lunar module and televised their activities back to Houston.
However, none of the networks even bothered to broadcast it.
So Apollo 13 was in place and what is Earth.
I see you need not the Apollo to pull us out of the back of the plane or send it back to the plane, so it was an immediate authority.
Mission control noticed a slight pressure drop in one of the oxygen tanks and instructed swigher to turn on the heaters and stir the tank up.
Unknown to the crew at the time, an electrical short circuit sparked a fire in the oxygen tanks protective covering, causing the tank to explode with such force that it blew a huge panel off the service module.
The explosion also ruptured the backup oxygen tank.
Are you coming down about?
And I heard a hiss bang. The spacecraft rocked back and forth, the jet started to fire to stabilize the spacecraft.
I looked up at Fred and Fred looked down at me and I knew that Fred didn't know what caused this bang.
Then I looked over to our third companion, Jack's like that he was over there in the left seat and his eyes were as wide as possible.
Our life support console and its operator noticed that we were beginning to see the pressure decrease in the oxygen and the service module.
And for a time period, we went through the normal steps to try to figure out what that situation might be.
Was it some problem with instrumentation, even though the crew had definitely heard something occur?
And more importantly, is it something where the procedures we had could isolate that problem?
And we started seeing so many signals, or all kinds of strange, electrical signatures, things in the fuel cells and all over work.
Didn't match any of the kinds of symptoms that we had been trained to look for.
And we felt that we really had run into another one of these bizarre instrumentation studies.
Looking at the instruments that told me the condition of two huge liquid oxygen tanks that we had laid back in the service module, on the quantity gauge of one, it read zero.
And on the quantity gauge of the other, I could see the needle slowly go down.
Okay, he's been up strong. I tried to reset the built-in-a-1, 3, above joint, great flight.
But the both joints are button flows.
The Arne Aldrich call me.
And the question to the dollar, what kind of like this between Arne and I, he says, John, there's been some kind of an enumly here in the guys in the mission control team,
or chasing it because it seems to be a bunch of unrelated things. It must be some kind of problem with the data relay of all the measurements from the spacecraft.
Initially, no one at mission control could believe that there was a complete structural failure of the spacecraft, a situation that was never even simulated before.
So I asked him, I asked him if I read me some parameters. So I asked him to call up to me, come to splice, and he read me some parameters.
And I said, well, read me some more. And I said, no, that's not an invitation for you to read me some more.
And I remember summarizing him at the end of that conversation, Arne, I don't know what problem you're chasing out there.
But it's a real problem. It's not an invitation problem. That problem is real. You have a real problem. I'll be right there.
A wet patch jacket looked out the side window, and I could see escaping at a high rate of speed, a gasp from the rear and my spacecraft.
And very shortly, we'd be completely out of oxygen. And we'd be completely out of electrical power.
And with that occurred because we gimbled the armory engine by means of electricity, we would lose our propulsion system.
What started out as a routine milk run to the moon was now turning out to be the single greatest test of NASA's creative ability to solve complex problems on a real time scale to bring the crew back alive.
The mission was lost. And these astronauts were in a broken-down spacecraft, almost 200,000 miles from Earth, going in the wrong direction and had no idea how or if they were going to come home.
On the night of April 13th, I had just come into the control center, maybe half-hour ahead of time. And I was getting ready to go on shift.
My team was going on to the shift that take over from Gene Steam, Gene Francis team.
We needed time to think, we needed time to establish a plan, we needed time to figure out what was going wrong, what had gone wrong, and then we needed time to figure out what we were going to do about it.
Basically, the first activity we had was by time.
I think most of the team operated with confidence that we were going to be able to pull it off if it was salvageable at all.
But I would have to say that probably each one of us in our own heart of hearts at some point during the events after the blow-up and before we got stabilized probably had a little bit of a sinking feeling as to how this thing was going to turn out.
Some people at Mission Control wanted the spacecraft to turn around and return to Earth immediately. But Cran's and Lonnie argued that they couldn't depend on the spacecraft's propulsion system and needed to build a rescue plan in the simulators.
I think there was a period in there when I think very few people had any idea how we would pull us off.
But I think the kind of training that we've had in the simulations and the kind of people we work with that even though you don't know what the outcome is, you probably don't have many opportunities to make mistakes.
I was home sick with amazels when the tanks blew up and I got a call from somebody at Mission Control that, hey, we've got a real problem here this thing.
We're lost in losing all our oxygen. Can you come in? So I got up and John and we all went to Mission Control and ended up at Mission Control all the backup crew.
And for the first 10 or 12 hours in my memory, as I recall it, it looked grim and we weren't going to make it.
Nobody ever anticipated that there was going to have a problem with this magnitude. I mean, they had never simulated that many system failures.
I mean, the electrical system totally failed. The oxygen system totally failed. I mean, those kind of things weren't supposed to happen.
They had two oxygen tanks because either one of them broke, the other one would work. I mean, they only needed one of those tanks to make the whole trip.
But they carried two just to be safe. And suddenly they lost both of them. I mean, like nobody thought that was ever possible. To it didn't look good.
With only 15 minutes of electricity left in the command module, Mission Control had to accept the fact that the command and service modules were dying and would have to be shut down completely.
There was never any plans or even procedures to totally turn it completely off dead in orbit or to activate it from a dead state in orbit.
That was not a set of procedures that we either had or thought we needed. So the whole technical aspects of doing that, you know, in the early process, power down and power it up.
And of course, then the emotional aspects of I've got to turn down the, I got to turn it off. The very module that takes you there and gets you there.
It was a philosophical hurdle as well as a technical hurdle in the road.
With the command module as good as dead, Mission Control decided that their only option was to move the crew into the lunar module.
We had caused on the flight before 13 the crew to have to use the laments of lifeboat, the lunar module as a lifeboat.
And it was a massive electrical failure that we'd given them, you know, that caused the event to occur.
And it worked quite well. And everybody took a look at those lifeboat procedures and was kind of prepared in a mental sense, put them back in the corner and never thinking that we'd ever really have to do anything like that.
So we started thinking in terms of using the laments of lifeboat.
Not knowing where that's going to take you next, because you can't come home in a little model.
And the course of the evening, you know, I guess one way to think of ourselves is we were a little bit of a, almost a mash hospital in a sense in that we had to stabilize the situation and and shut the command module down as gracefully as we could.
And get the crew moved over and power it up in the lunar module and then do a lot of things with it that we had not planned for or trained for.
And all that time, not make any bad mistakes that would compromise how things might turn out at the end of the mission.
The lunar module was small, cramped and designed for only two crew members to spend about 20 hours on the surface of the moon and didn't even have any chairs.
Now it would be called on to support all three crew members for at least the four or five day flight back to earth.
We formed a team in the back room that kind of got in the Coca-Cola and sat down and said, okay, now we've been through that dramatic experience.
Now what do we do? We've got to figure out how to get home.
All right, if we can get home, how do we get through the entry sequence?
When we started sampling out everybody's technique or what they need to get home, I was doing some mental arithmetic and I said, guys, we can't go back there.
We don't have any where near.
They kind of powering every batter to do this any where close to the flight place.
Everyone at mission control, including the flight crew, did some mental calculations of what power and consumables remained in the spacecraft and came to the conclusion that the crew would be lost.
Right here is in the back of an old envelope going back and forth and saying, you know, Jim, we don't have enough electrical power to get home.
So the conclusion was either we weren't going to make it or we're going to do this in such a different way and a way we never thought of.
That was the only two possibilities.
So I approached it from the standpoint was not so much that given it was impossible because that was unthinkable.
Talk about.
So we basically as a team back then did well given it impossible to work that way.
Let's talk about it.
What would it take to make it possible?
And so a team was formed between Cran's with all dynamics people, the trajectory people, the lunar module people, and the public managed service module people to get together now and see what does this mean to our mission.
What Dean did was to put John in the position of a year of the GAD that's got to come up for the final plan working with all the people, but John didn't work out the plan by himself.
He had a lot of people, but he was the GAD that became the power guru or the power czar to make sure that we played it right for the rest of the mission.
In the hopes of stabilizing the water and power resources, everything in the lunar module was shut down, even the heaters and guidance controls.
All that could be left on was a small light, a fan, and a radio for contact with mission control.
It was clear that this problem was going to require the combined efforts of every simulator engineer, systems analyst, backup astronaut, and computer technician.
They were all called into the NASA centers in the middle of the night of April 13th.
You know, they were worried if they were going to keep the light support systems going long enough to get them back.
And it was pretty shaky. They didn't know if the heat children was going to work. I mean, after all, they're been this huge explosion.
And it could have downed the heat shield easily. And there's no way to test it. You don't know until you actually do reentry. It's going to work.
Since all of the systems of the spacecraft would have to be pushed beyond the outer limits of their specifications, all of the contractors were also contacted for their expert opinions on what could be done to help rescue the crew.
While most of America slept, control rooms around the country hosted crews of blirriide technicians working on computers, slide rules, and simulators to come to a solution to this crisis.
People in Beth Fade in New York, the Liner Mod, swung into action.
Many of the people that supported them by building components that went into that other contractors swung into action, handle and standard, the, the soup manufacturer and some of the ECS controls, all of that swung into action on the command module side, built by Rockwell in California.
The same thing happened. They swung in there. They had test facilities. They had simulation capabilities that were unique test chambers and so all of that got turned. It was a team effort.
The first immediate challenge facing mission control was to change the trajectory of the spacecraft using the lunar module engines.
In case of Apollo 13, because of the landing site and the lighting conditions that were desired, we actually diverted from the free return trajectory that is free return to the earth after swinging around the moon.
And we were on a trajectory which had we not done any more burns, would never have returned anywhere near the vicinity of the earth.
And we knew that we had to perform some kind of a propulsion maneuver with one of the rocket systems in order to correct the trajectory and get ourselves swinging around the moon, but then coming back towards the earth, approximately in entry quarter.
After this burn put the spacecraft on the correct flight path, debates immediately began to rage and mission control. The directors and management split into two separate factions on just how quickly to bring the crew home.
One group wanted to jettison the useless service module to lighten the spacecraft and burn the lunar modules engine at maximum as it rounded the far side of the moon, bringing the spacecraft back to earth as soon as possible.
The other group argued if the service module was jettisoned, the command modules heat shield would be exposed to at least four days of the ultimate cold of space.
They pushed to leave the service module attached and take a more conservative but longer return to earth.
We had managers who listened to the technical inputs of the members of the team and myself and Lonnie and a couple of the other flight director.
So hey, the way to do it is to take the long road home because we have the confidence we can stretch the limb.
And again, what we have to do is we have to start with a strategy for coming home. We don't want force ourselves in the decisions early in the game.
We got this limb spacecraft. We've learned how to use it as a lifeboat. We oughta continue to use it out of lifeboat. We've got the ability to buy time.
The burn we decided on was to as we passed the moon's closest point of approach, we call that very sentiment.
Two hours later, we decided to do a burn. And so we decided to take the easier or the more conservative approach and get them back, get them back where we had a carrier and get them back at 142 hours.
About six hours after the initial explosion, the final details for the Paris-Syntian burn were being worked out by the backup astronauts in simulators and were ready to be radioed up to level.
They came up and said, are you ready to copy? The procedure I think will work. And I said, fine, my two companions were next to me.
They started reading the procedures and I started copying down everything and I looked at by companions. And they weren't listening.
They said, well, Jim, as we round the backside of the moon, the far side, we're going to take pictures. I said, if we don't get home, you won't get them developed.
News of Apollo 13's problems broke like waves of shock and disbelief around the world in the morning of April 14th.
The moment the astronauts are continuing to try to isolate their trouble, the late report says the spacecraft now is operating on battery power alone. All unnecessary equipment is being turned off.
The media was now in a feeding frenzy about this mission and the danger that the crew faced. Many nations offered their support and facilities to the rescue mission.
We had the Russians. We were right in the middle of the Cold War and the Russians came in and they offered the services of any ships they had to help us out.
I mean, you can get, I can get misty about that time and place because it was just a getting together, safe somebody. And that's what it was about.
The crew now faced another crisis. Their exhaled breath was creating a buildup of carbon dioxide. A chemical in canisters normally filtered out the carbon dioxide, but the system in the lunar module was becoming dangerously overburdened.
The command module had several large square canisters, but the lunar module had only two small round ones. When the command module was shut down, its circulation system also shut down.
The three astronauts would be dead of carbon dioxide poisoning at least a day before they could return to Earth without something being done to filter out the carbon dioxide in the capsule.
When they came up with, we're running out of, CO2 is building up and what are we going to do? A couple of assistants said, well, that's easy. We did that on SIMFOR. I think probably Apollo 8 where we found we could use the vacuum cleaner and blow air through the lithium hydroxide canister and we wrapped it with plastic and rate-afe and just, yeah, and they'd call up somebody and say, hey, do you remember how we did that?
Then someone would remember who was on console during that SIMFOR. They'll get them and they go off and say, hey, you guys don't figure out how to do this and write that down as a procedure.
Joe Kerwin was one of the astronauts at the time and Joe was working with the people in the chambers as to how we could best configure something like configure a solution to that problem.
Joe worked it all night and then Joe was one of the guys who came in and radioed up the instructions to the crew on how to configure the system so that we would indeed continue to be able to use the scrubbers or the filters that didn't fit in the holes in the lunar module.
We worked solid for 35 hours and the more we worked, the better it began to look. And so I think within the first 24 hours, about the time they were arriving at the moon, I had a piece in my heart that we were going to make it.
Unless some other major catastrophe happened, we were going to make it.
Once the crew swung around the moon and headed back towards the earth, the oxygen supply appeared to be under control, but it still did not look like there would be enough electricity and water to make it back home.
Astronauts and simulator engineers were working non-stop on procedures required for the crews safe return.
We worked very closely with the backup crew and the people who were running the simulator as part of this process because once we started sketching out what we could afford the stand for the power, we started to describe that interact with them.
The backup astronauts brought their own ideas and techniques back into the procedures and negotiation.
We only had so much lifetime of the batteries, so we started turning things off, powering down the lunar module even to lengthen the time of the batteries with less so that the crew could last until they got back home.
And that became very difficult because what we weren't sure of is just how cold it would get in the lunar module as we kept shutting things down.
So again, it triggered another set of analyses. People weren't just in the simulator plan these situations about what else can we turn off, how can we save a few walks here and there.
But other people were back at the desk just analyzing a range of data about the real spacecraft, how much was this lamp worth, how many watts did it burn?
While the ground crews were working on the reentry procedures, things got to be so cold in the lunar module that it was now a matter of survival just to be able to exist there for the trip back home.
The place was like the inside of a refrigerator. And for them to sustain that for as many days as they did, I think it was a real test of their physical stamina.
I'm not sure she sure how much presence they could have done and was going to accept yours. I think they could have spread that pretty, pretty ill and shivering and it had to be miserable.
The crew, of course, we had them in a situation that was very uncomfortable. It was cold, it was damp. They were very short on water.
It was a much higher priority to run the water bowlers, the cool spacecraft, and it was for drinking water.
And we tried the best of our ability to make this comfortable, who could for them. But in reality, white fruit and we move with the sub-system, got the first priority on water and power and temperature.
I had a number of debates with the engineers in the mission evaluation room about how cold certain sub-systems would get and if they would get so cold, they would freeze and therefore cause a problem with the command module for entry.
And so we struck a fine balance between projected temperature profiles for systems and power levels we could allow things to continue to run at.
Back on Earth, the reaction to the plight of Apollo 13 was worldwide and enormous. The creative genius that NASA was famous for was under the microscope of public scrutiny.
It seemed as though everyone on the planet was united in prayer for the safe return of these three brave astronauts.
More your astronauts will come back safe.
In the darkness and cold of space, level, haze, and swigherd still had some doubts as to whether or not they could really be rescued and were preparing themselves for the worst case scenario.
People are in a tight spot and there's really nothing to do when everything is quiet. It's bad news. You start to think.
And I think it was swigherd that said, you know, we might be exceeding escape velocity. If we miss the atmosphere coming back in, we'll of course escape from the Earth and that means going into an orbit about the sun.
I said, oh fine.
I mean, I mean, I mean, I mean, I mean, I mean, I mean, I mean, I mean, I mean, I mean, I mean, I mean, I mean, I mean, I mean, I mean, I mean, I mean, I mean, I mean, I mean, I mean, I mean, I mean, I mean, I mean, I mean, I mean, I mean, I mean, I mean, I mean, I mean, I mean, I mean, I mean, I mean, I mean, I mean, I mean, I mean, I mean, I mean, I mean, I mean, I mean, I mean, I mean, I mean, I mean, I mean, I mean, I mean, I mean, I mean, I mean, I mean, I mean, I mean, I mean, I mean, I mean, I mean, I mean, I mean, I mean, I mean, I mean, I mean, I mean, I mean, I mean, I mean
Even with all of the efforts to conserve electricity and return home faster, the spacecraft was still going to run out of critical resources just before it reached the point of reentry and the mission and crew would be lost
So, my flocking forward took a very ingenious way to flow power backwards from the winter module to charge. We had a battery charger on board that came in a service module, of course, with the fuel cell gone and the oxygen tank down. There was no way to power the battery charger.
But they came up with an ingenious way to manipulate hundreds of circuit Berk's. We shot a cap that checklist that the backflow power from the winter module to the command module.
That complicated maneuver put another 10 to 15% of electricity back into the command module batteries and gave the crew barely enough power needed to initiate the reentry procedures.
16 hours before reentry, the crew went back into the command module to prepare for their final procedures. The capsule was so cold that the windows and gauges were covered with frost, the water supply was already gone.
The crew were exhausted and hoping that their spacecraft would hold together for just a few more hours.
Because the command module was still connected to the service and lunar modules, the single most complex maneuver of this mission was first to separate from the service module, then separate from the lunar module and reenter the atmosphere in such a way as to not run into either one of them on the way down.
The folks planning for the entry portion of the mission had a variety of new things to consider. Plus they were also very constrained by the limited amount electrical power we had in the three entry batteries.
So everything that they did had to be constrained to how much power that we would really have there and how far we could stretch those batteries and bring the thing off successfully.
We got closer to reentry.
John and I began to get concerned about powering up the, where we're giving them enough time to power up the command module and was the maneuvers that Jim Lovell had to do in the lunar module to get them in the right attitude was what did we have that figured out right.
We finally ended up with a complete set of procedures to the two then sent over to the simulator and gave it to a cold crew because it wouldn't really go for me to go run the procedures since I've essentially put it together I would do it right.
Anyhow without the language being correct so we gave it to a cold crew that had not had anything to do with it.
And hopes of catching any ambiguous phrasing or things that would be difficult.
We got concerned about that so we ran to the simulator and sure enough I mean we were coming to come with in 10 degrees of that critical maneuver so we talked like control and abandoned in that maneuver and let's just stand with a safe attitude and when we separate then we will reorient and get things done and that's what we did.
The astronauts on the ground were in value and the spirit of our knowledge was exactly what was happening upstairs that they also were enabled to do that because of the great simulation they were doing.
Which I think will forever be one of the unsung major major reasons that we had the successes that we did even when things worked right.
They were invaluable but when things went wrong they were really just absolutely necessary.
The crew jettison the service module first then tried to swing around to get a look at the damage caused by the oxygen tank explosion.
And it went all start of that thing.
Is that right.
Just before reentry into the earth's upper atmosphere the lunar module was jettisoned.
I think we felt reasonably comfortable once we got the command module separated from all this excess hardware now that it was going to work okay because we had checked those systems out and we had brought the systems back online we had all systems working about an hour before we got ready to do that that separation work and I think we were reasonably satisfied it was going to work okay.
Everyone realized however that there could have been damage to the heat shield parachutes or any of a dozen other potential problems resulting in the loss of the capsule and crew.
All those things were on our mind but not very high level in the sense that for the most part there are things we couldn't do anything about they were of what we would call a hand reigning type.
If we didn't do anything about them and we couldn't figure out any way if there were any defenses against their implications we generally walked past it and said well if it is so bad if it's not will be okay.
When the heat shield of a spacecraft traveling 20,000 miles per hour first comes into contact with the upper atmosphere it becomes red hot from the friction.
The super heated air around the capsule creates a radio blackout for several minutes based on prior missions the blackout time had been calculated down to the second.
In the case of Apollo 13 I mean they were supposed to be you know say it's three minutes and ten seconds in blackout and so after you know they're watching the clock and it gets down to three minutes and ten seconds and they're waiting to hear from them and don't hear anything.
You know I mean the where the oh god the parachute works because you know they've been frozen out there in outer space all this time maybe a parachute could work maybe the heat shield didn't work all these things that maybe didn't work.
You know in it's three minutes and thirty seconds and three minutes and forty seconds and I think it went past four minutes.
You could have heard him drop in the control center.
I mean it was just quiet as it could be only the captain on every once in a while calling Apollo 13 is his Houston Apollo 13 is his Houston do you read.
Finally up for them like four and a half minutes total blackout.
I think it was Jack.
It may have been him but it may have been Jack.
How long he used to this 13 how you read almost casually.
I report to the right for aircraft to have acquisition.
The reentry was clearly the most widely watched worldwide event in the history of television and everyone certainly expressed a simultaneous sigh of relief then cheer as they saw the parachutes come out and drop the capsule into the ocean.
We opened the doors of this room and they hundreds of people would come into the room all of them had one little piece of this mission.
But without them we put the button this special there was just a feeling of togetherness of bonds unity a completion.
It was just the most marvelous feelings in my heart like this that in this room.
Perhaps the most important aspects of this particular mission were the overall implications of this rescue.
I think it's a real tribute to the way NASA does business but not one thing that we did had to be invented in scratch.
I'm convinced that virtually everything that we did had been done in a simulation somewhere sometime prior to that mission.
The only thing we did was to package some in a different order.
I think the great thing about Apollo 13 is that it really shows that it's not all about technology.
Even when all the gadgets fail these people can still pull it out.
They did it in that case. It just shows how what the level of ingenuity is.
I mean just the determination that the people involved in the commitment work that they rescued their friends fundamentally.
I mean to remember all their friends that are out there lost in space and they were going to get them back.
They were determined to get them back. They weren't going to accept no for an answer and they pulled it off.
We went into space as a country. It was a response to major challenge.
We went there to learn about space. We went there to learn about ourselves.
We went there to explore. We went there to be able to go out beyond that.
In that context I would view that in terms of opening up space, in terms of being confident in our ability to do things, Apollo 13 was really a tremendous success.
None of the three crew members of Apollo 13 went into space again.
Jim Lovell had already promised his wife that this was to have been his last mission.
Jack Swiggard went into politics and was elected as a congressman but died of cancer before taking office.
Fred Hayes went on to do development work on the space shuttle but retired before its first flight.
TK Madingley who was replaced for this mission eventually did go to the moon on Apollo 16 along with John Young and Charles Duke.
Madingley was also the commander of two space shuttle missions becoming a veteran astronaut himself.
Perhaps the Apollo 13 mission showed the world beyond any shadow of a doubt just how much could be accomplished
when the success of a mission was the only thing that mattered, where thousands of people contributed anonymously towards achieving that single goal and taking pride in the team effort without any self-serving attention given to any one individual.
No matter what the challenge, mankind has the ability to rise to the occasion.
The Apollo 13 mission was to have a great time and to be able to achieve that goal.